---
title: About This Site and Me
date: 2019-11-11
layout: style
draft: true
---

I am a software devloper.

Over the past 30+ years I have worked on large and small projects for
large and small companies alike. I worked on projects that have been a
phenomenol successes and a few abismal failures.

Over this time I have collected a person list of _Best Practices_,
that attempt to take elements from large projects that enhance the
organization and efficiency of teams that consist of technical and
non-technical people alike.

Like most _software engineers_, I love to jump right in and just start
coding. However, the years and many sleepless nights have taught me,
beyond a shadow of a dought, that the appropriate amount of time spent
***upfront*** doing the right activities (processes) will pay off in
spades as you proceed through the development phase.

And in fact, maybe the factor determining the success or failure of
your project..

### I am on a Mission!

I have made it my mission to understand critical software lessons,
processes, patterns, best practices, from modern practices
(_microservices_ and _devops_) to the runes of ancient lore (kernel
hacking and network programming).

I have also adopted practices from smaller projects that lend
themselves to efficient and flexible software development teams. 

Previously, I have made no real attempt at consolidating and
documenting these practices, until now.

This website serves in large part, the facility for me to not only
document my _Best Practices_, but I will also be collecting Best
Practices by effective and efficient developers all around the globe! 

## Who is this site for? 

This site is for _small teams building software_, this includes not
only the developers themselves but everybody involved in the process:
_managers_, _designers_, _owners_ and content creators.

### Why Small Teams

Personally, I prefer working on small (effective) teams, where the
over-riding goal is to build something needed, that might otherwise be
a chaotic, unorganized mess.  

I like to bring order to the chaos, but only as much as is required to
make the team efficient and effective.  No extra baggage or unecessary
processes that distract from the true job of delivering high quality
software. 

### Processes Over Tools

This site will focus more on the processes and prinicpals rather than
specific tools.  However, we will certainly use some specific tools to
accomplish or objectives.

The processes and supporting tools can be picked up quickly by a
new team and new members, without bogging getting bogged down with
steep learning curves. 

As matter of fact, I encourage the use of tools the developer or team
is already familiar with.

It should me it more fun (and less of a pain in the ass) for
developers, while giving management and owners much more accurate
visibility into the project at hand.

With this system, everybody on the team will know exactly where to
find _everything_, rather than sifting through folders on the
computer, _dropbox_ or was it _evernote_, wait, no it was that VM I
spun up a few months back.!. None of that!

## Do you use this stuff yourself?

You bet I do!  Pretty much everytime I get a new client.  The times I
ignore the advice of the industry, including my own, I enevitebly come
around to regretting it.

When a client has me work on a new project, I can whip out my check
lists, setup my infrastructure without busting a sweat and busy
solving problem and making the world a better place.

## Want to Share Your Thoughts?

Do you have any experience with building software, or ever have
a website or webapp built for yourself.  If so, I would love to ask,
and have you answer a couple quick questions about your own software
development practices, or needs, as the case may be.

If you share with me, I promise to share everything I got with you
:)!!!

> Sign up now!?!

If you interested, but have not built an a webapp or website yet, but
are thinking about doing one soon, you should sign up too.  

You can run elements of your current project by me, if you would like
to get my personal feedback.

Cheers!

Rusty Eddy

