---
title: Why Choose the Go programming Language for your Project?
description: >
  The programming language Go as taken the development world by storm
  over the last few years. This article will discuss reasons why Go
  has become so popular and why you might choose it for your next
  project. 
---

## Go is simple 

Go is easy to learn to program with and it is free! Go is _much_
easier to maintain and deploy than Java. 

Go does not have weird _virtual environments_ of Python or npm, gulp,
grunt, yarn, webpack (what's next?) convuluted and complex build
environments. 

## Go is Fast

It smokes most other languages, except the grand mother of Unix
programming _C_.  The Go programming language is almost as fast
(performant geeky folks like to say) as C.

Since Go is NOT interperted at runtime like Python and NodeJS is
applications written in Go will Smoke similar app written in these
other languages.

Not only will it be faster, but typically will use less memory and CPU
cycles. 

### Compiled Binaries

Go _compiles_ into binaries that are ready to run. Once the binary has
been built, it requires no interpretation or _on the fly compilation_.
No runtime environment to be installed and configured.  

Go **compiles really fast** as matter of fact a sizeable Go project
can compiler much faster than it takes a simple NodeJS or Python
project to just start running.

Since Go is compiled it produces very fast binaries with all syntax
and build time errors having been fixed before Go can compile.

## Go is Easy to Deploy and Automate

A Go program can be distributed via a single binary.  For example if
you want to use the wonder static website generator used to generate
this website, just download the binary and run it. Simple as that no
pulling dependencies or building virtual environments.

## No external Runtime Required

configuration files required, _virtual machines_ required by _NodeJS_,
_Python_ or _C#_ or _Java_. 

## No Build Tools Required

Go relies on no external _build tools_ you'll find Make (maybe some help
from CMake) or _Ant_, _Maven_ etc. used to build Java.

## Great Concurrency

Unlike Python or Node, Go has outstanding support for Concurrency
which lack directly in python or Node requiring multiple processes to
run and heavy weight Inter-process communication (IPC) mechanisms to
be implemented.

## Other Great Reasons

- Built in HTTP server for embedded web static or dynamic we pages, a
  REST server can be written in about 10 lines of code. Of course it
  won't do much, but the lines that exceed 10 will be implementing
  your application.
  
- Automatic Documentation

- Embedded Testing environment

- Built in static code analysis

- Cross compile: build a raspberry pi image on your laptop!

- Command line tools and automation

It is easy to learn and fun to write! 

Want to learn Go?

  
