---
title: Version Control and Tracking Progress
date: 2020-06-12
weight: 30
description: >
  After all the planning time has come to change code. What happens
  now?  Clear evidence of a rookie team is the lack of a Version
  Control System (VCS) tool and associated processes built around your
  VCS will provide all the visibility you need to track progress of
  your software project. Your VCS becomes the source of truth for your
  project. 
---

It frightens me everytime I am introduced to a new software project
where the "latest" source code is somebodies folder _somewhere_ with
copies being passed around on thumb drives.

Such a lack process invites confusion from the beginning and inspires
questions like:

> which copy of the file has your changes?

If you are working like this STOP! It does not have to be this
way. no, start using Version Control now! 

Done correctly, your VC will track _every change_ to your source code
with clear well written summaries (logs) of the problem that was
solved.

## Git and Version Control

Version Control Systmes (VCS) has been around since at least the
1970's . These included RCS, CVS, SVN and lot's of clunky and lame pay
versions.

Now we have _GIT_.

Git was development by the famous _Linus Torvalds_ author of Linux to
handle the distributed nature of the **huge** Open Source software
[_Linux Kernel_](http://kernel.org). Development and the thousands of
software developers that continuously contribute to the code base. 

### Github is Git as a Service

We also have Github!

Github revolutionized software development by taking the widely
popular _Git_ version control system and wrapping online services
around them, such as an _Issue Tracker_, _Project Kanban Board_ and a
whole social infrastructure allowing developers to easily share Open
Source software projects.

## Github for Services and Workflow

To be clear, there are some other _great_ services built around _git_,
[_gitlab_](http://gitlab.org) and [_bitbucket_](http://bitbucket.org)
are just two. 

Fortunantely for us, _github_ provides quite a few services integrated
around git itself giving us a rich set of tools to build a sophisticated
development environment, and all for _free_.

Github works on a _freemium_ model where all Open Source projects get
all features for free. However, private repositories will be required
to pay a nominal fee to unlock all of githubs features.

For our purposes, everything we need is free, so don't pull out your
wallet! 

## Enough Theory?

OK, next we are going to roll up our sleeves and "_git busy_".
